One of the strong supporters of the Colonel's
Revolt. Not so much the Colonel's Revolt, but of
what we were trying to do. The objective, which was
to build an army instead of allowing it to be
destroyed. Well, General Gavin, James M. Gavin,
who was Chief of Research and Development and
later Chief of Army Operations and Plans, And I was
very close to General Gavin. I think he was a
wonderful man. You know, he was a major general
when he was about 30 years old, 31 years old.
Commanded 82nd Division, I guess, 82nd Airborne.
He was one of the early airborne types. I was
involved in Fort Benning in the early days and
glider training on the 4X5 type. I was in the second
armored division and didn't go to that side of the
thing because this armored thing was so
fascinating to me, the mechanization. As you
know, our armored divisions were patterned after
the German Panzer divisions. The first that we had
in our country, the first and the second.
Mr. Wilson finally cut him off from the press, cut
him off from visiting Congress, cut him off from
answering letters to the Congress, and that sort
of thing. And all the letters that came to him from
the Congress where we were mustering support to
get an army, to build an army of the future. He was
not permitted to answer, and I would go by each
morning and pick up his letters and answer them
myself, show him the answers, and sign them off
myself back to the Congress. So that was a way
around him violating an edict from the White House
through the Secretary of Defense.
We had a— What specifics? What specific proposals
did you put forth to the congressman?
We know what Wilson's trying to do. He's trying to
cut the size of conventional forces and build a
nuclear force and the so-called more bang for the
buck idea. One specific one was Jupiter C.
Missile. I wanted, and General Gavin wanted to go
ahead and fire in September the 26th
1956,
and to place in orbit a satellite.
And we were ready to do it, had the capability to do
it. We'd had some failures with the Navy Vanguard
system, but Jupiter C, which later was Redstone
Missile, We had a major general, Maderas, down
there, a real sharp ordnance major general. And we
know where we were going. We needed about $10
million in order to launch.
Eisenhower and Wilson turned us down. We got the
money in the program. They wouldn't spend it.
next year following the Sputnik was fired and made
us look like a bunch of asses and uh so this is you
must have got the money after Sputnik oh yes got it
then sure but you see what you see what I'm talking
about and I'd like history to know this and and uh
another thing uh they uh Wilson and Eisenhower
turned down us having tactical nuclear weapons
along with Admiral Radford the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs. So Senator Scoop Jackson who is a
magnificent individual and a knowing man and who
believes in the defense of the free world in the
United States he was chairman of the Joint he was
chairman of the subcommittee for military
application on the Joint Committee on Atomic
Energy. It was a joint committee in those days
between the House and the Senate. Chet Holifield
was the chairman, as I recall. And this is going
back some 30 years, you know, almost. And...
Senator Jackson was chairman of the military
application subcommittee. General Gavin sent me
over and said, we cannot get Radford or the
president or Wilson to prove off on these
artillery projectiles, 155 and 8-inch. They just
won't do it. With tactical nuclear weapons. He
said, what can you do? I said, well, let's get it
done. So I go over and I talk to important members of
the House Armed Services, Senate Armed Services,
and in a matter of a few days,
we get a request from Senator Jackson to brief him
on our requirements, and we go. General Gavin and I
and one other nuclear specialist in the operating
business. And we get that approved over the heads
of the President and the Secretary of Defense and
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs. That was a part at
that time of the whole thing of trying to save an
army and make it viable and capable of defending
this country. Give me another specific. Was the
airborne part of it another specific? Another one
was helicopters. Another one was tactical
fighters. Another one was tactical airlift. All
of those.
Better munitions. Which ones did you succeed on,
and which ones couldn't you get through Congress?
I guess we eventually got them all. Eventually got
them all. The Colonel's Revolt, then, was a heavy
lobbying effort behind the administration.
Both. Within the public, within the industry, and
within the Congress. Okay, we talked a little bit
about Congress. How about industry? What did you
do as far as that? Industry? We had General Motors
and other corporations that were deeply involved
in lightening up equipment and making
helicopters, looking at helicopter capability.
We'd had some experience with helicopters in
Korea
and we were looking at larger units other than just
a helicopter company and
lighter weight weapons. The M-16 was one.
lightweight machine gun was one of them
a airborne artillery we already had but new
projectiles like ICM improved conventional
munitions little things everybody's
complaining about over in Israel right here
there's one right there you put 500 of those in a
cluster bomblet that's a That's a bomblet right
there. Now look at the other end of it and you'll see
it's a shaped charge. So that's the improved
conventional munition. We say dual purpose.
That'll burn a hole through the top of a
lightweight vehicle. It'll also hit the ground
and explode and throw fragments for 30 meters. And
when you get a canister of 500 of those dumped in a
about six football fields that don't let many
people get away, you see. So that's a cluster bomb
like CBU, that was one of the ideas we had. We have
that in the artillery projectile now. There's
some more than a couple hundred in the eight inch
and there's something less than a hundred in the
155 round. That's the new munition, it's very
effective for us. But you understand the
shape-charge effect? No. You see this? You see
this? The explosive is... This is all explosive,
but it's a shape-charge. This fuse starts it
burning from the back end of that place there, you
see? And it fires a hot... This... cone shape here
reverse cone here that hits that like that this
little fuse in here starts this burning and it puts
out a a 900
degree centigrade or more
uh stream of fire that burns a hole through this
light armor here about the size of my finger. But on
the other side, the spalling will be an area about
this big of hot molten metal that destroys
personnel inside the vehicle. But that's what we
call a shaped charge, where the fire starting here
and the intensity starts back here. This causes a
sharp burning flame of about the size of my little
finger here to concentrate on that particular
point, burning a hole through and causing
spalling on the inside. So basically the cluster
bomb then can go, the first thing it does is
penetrate into the vehicle. Into a light,
thin-skinned vehicle, a light armored vehicle.
Into a light, like a personnel carrier or
something like that? And then once it gets inside
it has, Well, what it does is molten metal from that
is burned away. Now, it will also hit the ground and
explode. It has an explosive effect also.
Fragments. This fragment is from here. This
breaks away as fragmentation. That cone there
burns through things. I see. So that's dual
purpose. Dual purpose. We call it DPICM, Improved
Conventional Munition. We used it in Vietnam.
Yeah, I know we used the clusters in Vietnam.
Another one we were after was... Fuel
bombs, let's see if I can give you, CBU-55 was a fuel
bomb of three canisters of 60 pounds each with a
small parachute on it. has a delayed fuse it hits
the ground explodes allows out this say propane
and uh with a delayed fuse this being gas being
heavier and airy it goes down in the holes and in the
tunnels and then explodes a tremendous weapon
it'll clear each one of those 60 pound canisters
will clear uh maybe uh fifty meter diameter of all
the brush and everything else, plus kills
everything down in the holes in that area in which
it was. It's the only system we have that really
will get down in a hole or a cave and get a fella out.
Were they used in Vietnam? Yes. I think they would
have been useful there. Well, they were very, very
useful, and Mr. Carter cut them out and wouldn't
let the Israelis have them. I thought the Israelis
ought to go ahead and make them themselves.
They're not that difficult to make. Now let's talk
a little bit about how you manipulated industry,
Congress, and other people. Did you have sort of a
public relations campaign? One fellow was
responsible with the press. Oh, really? One of the
colonels? Yes. One of them carried the press and
leaked to them information that was counter to the
big bang for the buck. Yeah, counter to the
administration's view. In other words, the
administration is— is destroying the
conventional capability of our armed forces.
Apparently little consideration being given to
the fact that conventional wars of limited types
and for limited duration which impact on our
national security cannot be dealt with this
philosophy and this sort of strategy and
therefore Congress and the American people ought
to know the truth on what's happening and that sort
of stuff and that continuous approach in that
direction. And
we had a top secret document somehow got leaked out
by
a colonel that was responsible for that aspect of
it.
What did that document deal with? What was the
basic topic? I think it dealt primarily with the
organization of the five colonels
and then it hit the press. About the same time
The authorization
bill had,
was being debated on the floor, which was
tremendously different from that in which the
administration had submitted. Mr. Eisenhower
said root out the, those people that asked Wilson
to investigate and find out who they are, and
Wilson said there's a bunch of eager beavers
gnawing on the wrong tree.
And, uh, I had a little fire, I guess, in the
Pentagon, and that took care of that. We were all
investigated. That took care of the documents.
Yeah, it took care of all the documents. We were
investigated. by direction of Mr. Wilson.
I had already been selected for the Army War
College
and that list was out.
There was a reconsideration of the whole list and
as I recall one colonel went to command and all the
others went to war colleges, either the National
War College or the Army War College.
Investigations continued while we were there. I
was accused of passing top secret documents to the
Congress and the investigator that investigated
me, I
thought he was kind of a foolish chap. He was doing
his job, He thought that it was really bad that I was
passing top secret documents to the Congress.
Well, did you admit that? Oh yes, I admitted it. I
said, oh yes, I certainly did. He said, well, who'd
you send them to? I said, members of the Senate
Armed Services Committee, House Armed Services
Committee, Senate Appropriations Committee,
House Appropriations Committee, senate foreign
relations committee house foreign affairs
committee and i said all of those people are
cleared for top secret and even security
clearance is higher than yours colonel and i said
let's be sure that we get this on the record here and
i'm surprised that you didn't know or whoever put
you up to this didn't know that members of congress
many of them carry them higher security
clearances and than some members of the Armed
Forces. I got off a clean bill of health. My friend
who was also at the Army War College with me, who's
not living now, Don Ewell, Y-U-E-L-L, class of 39
from West Point, was the only one as far as I know
that received any punishment at all and his was
administrative reprimand because he's the one
that the top secret document accidentally got
away from. To the press? To the press,
yeah. So that ended a story in my life except while
at the War College I continued to fight for and made
speech after speech on the floor to all the
students about the pentamic division, which was a
destruction of our army capability. I continue to
do that.
And
I've continued to work toward what we need, and I'm
doing it right today. I guess I'll always. So you
said that before that you were close here to a
court-martial. Is that as close as you came?
That's as close as I ever came. Ms. Hollingsworth
thought that her objective in life, I think, was to
do whatever she could to prevent me from being
another Billy Mitchell. And that never entered my
mind. It never entered my mind that I was going to be
court-martialed for what I was doing, because I
believed in what I was doing. I believed in the
Army, I believed in our country, and I'm honest.
And if you're honest,
you don't have to, and you speak the truth, from
what you know to be the truth, and you speak not
otherwise, then you never have to worry about
tomorrow. You don't have to worry about what you
said today. You never have to do that. You don't
have to have a long memory. Yes, but honesty is one
thing, and politics is something entirely
different at times. That's true. And you're
dealing now, and not in the military sphere— but
you're dealing in a political sphere and the
politicians also think that they're honest, they
just have a different view of the world in this
particular case. So weren't you ever fearful that
the politicians, the president, the secretary of
defense, your civilian authorities, weren't you
fearful that you were going to jeopardize your
career because you were taking an opposite view
and taking it so stridently?
I
guess I didn't give that very much consideration
as I look back on it. I still had a great belief in man
regardless of whether he was a politician or
whether he was a commoner on a day laborer or a dock
worker. I had a great belief in God and that he had
made a determination somewhere along the line
that I'd do certain things and I had witnessed his
protection of me and safeguarding of me in some
very serious conflict and battle
and some very serious warnings that he had given me
in which I accepted and which I would never have
been here if I had not If he had not signaled me to
certain dangers, I'm talking about the great
master of all of us. So I'm a real strong believer,
and when I believe in what I'm trying to do, I've
never allowed anything to interfere with it
because I always trust in him signaling me and
pulling me out before I step over the side of the
mountain. Obviously some of your superiors
thought you were doing the right thing and
supported you, otherwise you wouldn't have been
promoted at that time to full colonel. That's
right, sir. That's true. Very true. And how can you
account for being promoted? I mean obviously you
have an outstanding record, but you're in a
situation here which might be damaging to your
career. Who do you think it was that wanted you to
become a, get a promotion? Well, I think General
Ridgway, and I think General Taylor. In fact, when
I left to go to War College, I went in to see General
Taylor to tell him goodbye, and he said to me, he
said, you've had some trying times, and said you
have done an outstanding job, and I want you to take
this photograph here, that I've autographed for
you and he said, I just want you to know that
I would never make you a general officer unless
you've done what you've done.
That's what he said.
And I thought to myself, that's a hell of a
compliment from a hell of a great man.
So, I went off to War College and continued
to be controversial there amongst the students,
but a leader amongst the students.
We had committees where you study to build a
national strategy. That was very helpful to me in
building a new strategy in Korea, a new strategy in
Pakistan, and also for him, and also for working
certain programs when I was Deputy Secretary of
Defense. Two-track system in high school, I
worked with HEW on that. The two-year trade
schools in South Carolina have been a great
supporter of that.
You've got to understand that some people are
suited for academics, but most of us are not. I
think maybe, generally speaking, we've had too
damn many people go to college and not enough learn
the trade.
We got a lot of people with PhDs but not of our
experience. The
Vietnam conflict fostered a hide from the war by
going to get a baccalaureate degree and graduate
in June and start in September on a master's degree
and when you finish that one go the next year to a PhD
and you In my view, that sort of thing has not
contributed one goddamn thing to our society. And
that's the reason why I find some PhDs today out
working as day laborers and can't get a job. And my
view of education is that you get a, if you're
academically inclined to make a contribution to
our society, you get a baccalaureate degree and
then you go get some experience in that and find out
where is it you can best make a contribution and
then go back and get a higher degree in the area in
which you like and you can make a contribution and
then after you've gone out and had a look at that and
made some mistakes and said well I made a mistake
here or there but here's where I can do then you can
go ahead after experience and become a Ph.D. and
really make a contribution to our country. And if
you can't, then God damn it, you haven't done
anything but fool yourself and the American
people. You see? I got funny ideas about this, but
that's the way it is. I don't think it's the damn
funny. So you were a leader there at the War
College. Oh, yeah. I had... Many committees. I
chaired many committees.
One committee was, I chaired a committee to study
the Iranian, Turkestan, Tashkent, Armenian,
Black Sea area, Gaspain Sea area, that part of the
world. As a matter of fact,
For six weeks I was a red army commander, a field
marshal of the total red army to take the
Mediterranean.
And opposing forces was another fellow.
And you had to play it as it is today with the top
secret intelligence of both sides.
And I beat the hell out of Americans.
And then,
for six weeks, I became the American commander to
come up with what is needed in order to avoid that.
Then that becomes a part of a kind of a detailed,
worked out,
colonel level Air Force, Army, Navy students who
are there. strategy for defense
of the Persian Gulf against the Soviets.
Because of your interest in that area, is that why
they sent you to Pakistan right after your
completion of the course? I think so, I think so. So
from 1957 then until 1959 you were the chief of the
U.S. Army. element of the MAG group in Pakistan.
Now, of course at this time, India is having
problems with Pakistan. Right. We were trying to
play a balancing act here, weren't we, as far as our
policy is concerned? Yes. That must have put you in
a pretty tough spot. Put me in a hell of a tough spot.
As a matter of fact, To answer General Iyub's
question, who was a commander-in-chief and lived
at Rawalpindi, and I lived in the same general
area, maybe half a mile away. What was his name?
Iyub Khan, A-Y-U-B-K-H-A-N. He was a general,
commander-in-chief of the armed forces, later
president. And I got deeply involved in that, his
becoming president. while I was there. He became
president, yes, I will tell you.
But my mission was one of training about five or six
divisions of the Pakistani Army and equipping
those with American equipment.
And some of the questions that you encountered
from General Iyub later President Iyub was how can
you
deny me the use
of your military aid equipment in the Azad Kashmir
border area where we have a United Nations
ceasefire team between the Indians. How can you
deny me the use of your aid equipment up there
machine guns rifles mortars tanks trucks and that
sort of thing while at the same time you give the
Indians 300 million grant aid and they go by
106-millimeter recoilless rifles from you and
Jaguar fighter planes from the British and bring
them up here and use them against me.
And said, you've been up there, and I'll point them
out to you, your U.S. equipment.
I said, General, are you...
I'm a military man and a soldier, as you are.
I said, I can't answer that question. I said,
that's a question that should be asked by your
prime minister of our president.
He said, they're politicians and they won't ask
each other questions like that.
And he said, that's what's wrong with, and that's
what's part of the problem here in this country.
He said, your government gives my government
wheat, and there's
ship load after ship load of wheat stacked in the
harbor, rotting in Karachi, and my government
doesn't have sense enough or the capability to get
the weed out to our tribal people and the villagers
here who have sore bellies because they're not
getting enough to eat. Yet the weed is rotting down
there.
And he said, why does your government do that? Why
does your government gloat over what support
you're giving us here beyond our capability to
even manage? and you deny me in an area where I need
things, military, you've limited me to very
little. Said, are you, said, we have declared
ourselves as friends of the United States, but are
you really my friend? We're your friend, but are
you really my friend? Because here's what you're
doing to us. Those questions are very difficult,
very hard to, to explain and you put your American
foreign policies, put honest people out at the
colonel and general level in a hell of a position.
So
you get on with
or trying to support your government, or you quit
and get out. So, I think most of the military feels
that they've got something to contribute. Kind of
swallow hard and go ahead and do the best they can
under the circumstances.
Did you bring the Pakistani divisions? Did you
bring them up to par? I brought the Pakistani
divisions up to par except in one area, which is a
crucial area in that part of the world amongst all
of the peoples in the Middle East, including all
the Arab nations, including the Iranians,
Pakistanis, most all of the people in that area. of
the world. And that is that they do not understand
this business of logistics support
and the management of the things that's necessary
in order to keep a fighting force in being and
sustainable during combat. And that's
ammunition and this was brought out very clearly
against a war which occurred after I left there
where in the Brits I mean where in the Indians and
Pakistan went at it
over Kashmir area and Pakistani tank battalions
were just eating up the Indians driving them back
until they ran out of fuel and ran out of
ammunition, at which point in time they got out of
their tanks, left them, and walked back. They
cited recorded instances of
that. Those soldiers came out of the villages
ninety percent of them out of the villages.
We're in, they've been there eighteen years with a
wooden plow and bullocks.
There's not much logistic support there for that.
And you don't change people overnight. Okay? Now
tell me about the episode of helping the general
and your role in that. After I'd been there some
time, well, I hadn't been there very long until I
gained his confidence and he certainly gained
mine. I thought he was one of the most magnificent
men I had ever met in my life. Why do you say that?
Well, he was the most balanced man. He was a British
sand hearse trained officer. He commanded, he was
the first commander of a British battalion during
World War II in India. Normally British units,
those commands are all Brit officers second in
command is an Indian, or a Pakistani, or a Gurkha,
or whoever it might be, Ethiopia, an Egyptian,
something like that, but all those commands,
that's the Brits, they had saved those positions,
except Iyub, I think, was the first one that really
was a commander of a battalion. And he's just one
brilliant man, and was commander in chief, and had
a great personality. He loved to shoot, loved to
hunt, and the hunting was great in the Himalayas,
bird shooting. He
was a good horseman, although he didn't play polo,
he was a good horseman. He wanted me to play golf
with him, which I did. We'd go shooting together,
Miss Hollingsworth and Begum Ayoub, who was still
in Perda, but Mrs. Ayoub and Mrs. Hollingsworth.
And the daughters were very close to Mrs.
Hollingsworth. I went by to visit the daughter and
the son-in-law. The son-in-law was a Wally of
Swat, the governor of Swat State. And so, we were
kind of a close family. And Ayoub's son knew He was
in the military and we were very close as a matter of
fact. He called one day, an aide called one day. We
worked from 7 o'clock in the morning until 12
o'clock and the temperatures were such that you
stayed in the rest of the day.
I went about other things where you were not
subject to the stress and the heat. None of the
facilities were air conditioned were they? No,
none.
I had a call about one o'clock, and it was General
Ayoub's aide, and he said, General Ayoub would
like to speak to you, and I said, yes sir. He said,
Holly, he said, I didn't get a chance to see you this
morning, he said. Could I come over now?" And I
said, yes, sir, General, you please do. I'm here at
home. On the veranda, Miss Hollingsworth and Mrs.
O'Brien, Captain O'Brien's wife was one of my
ordnance officers out of my team of about 12
officers.
We're sitting on the veranda and our chocodile who
was a guard, opened the gate and in came the big
black Cadillac limousine and General Ayoub got
out and greeted the ladies and myself and I knew he
wanted to see me so I said, well, General Ayoub,
since I didn't get a chance to see you this morning,
Maybe we could excuse ourselves and present the
ladies here and go back to one of the drawing rooms,
of which there was three in my quarters. He said, oh
yes, I'd love to. I'd love to do that. So we go back. I
said, sir, it's two o'clock. Would you like a
whiskey? He said, yes, I believe I would. So we had a
whiskey. It was scotch with water and no ice.
British style. So the bear came in, and Ibram was a
bear. He brought in a drink, and he said, well,
said, Holly, I might as well get on with it. I said,
yes, sir. He said, did you ever think about taking
over a country?
I said, uh, No, sir, not really, but I said I've
studied all the principles involved and
it's been applied by other governments and
throughout a large share of history.
And I know key principles that's involved in
taking over the country and what you have to do.
He said, well,
my government
is trying to run an advanced state of democracy
in order to satisfy your foreign policy
requirements so we can get aid for our people.